PR #36 CLOSEOUT CRITIQUE — STUDY B RESOLUTION CORRECTION
Prepared 2026-09-25 for the owner and Claude
Scope: review and planning only. No code, data, or PR state changed here.

DECISION

PR #36 fixes the three original defects and three important numerical defects.
Its tests and provenance preservation are strong. It should not, however, be
described as establishing a precise post-onset life estimate yet. The corrected
record supports this narrower statement:

  Under the stated B2 synthetic observation model, one noisy canonical-unit
  realization produced a likelihood minimum at u = 0.775 and a threshold region
  spanning approximately 0.75–0.98. The profile is nearly flat over most of that
  region, and the upper rise coincides with nuisance-parameter bounds. The result
  is therefore a broad, asymmetric, bound-sensitive identification result, not a
  demonstrated +/-0.21 resolution or an unbiased estimate of u.

WHAT PR #36 CORRECTLY FIXES

- B2 now actually stacks the young baseline and aged snapshot, with shared nuisance
  parameters; B1 remains the snapshot-only comparison.
- The profile grid reaches the declared u domain rather than ending at the truth.
- Solver failures make a profile unresolved rather than silently shaping it.
- Whitening removes the thirteen-order feature-scale problem without forming Sigma^-1.
- Positive nuisance parameters are optimized in log coordinates with continuation.
- Undefined half-life features are infeasible and receive a finite search wall.
- The pre-2026-09-23 artifact is retained and the correction is separately recorded.
- CI is green and the new tests cover the principal regression risks.

P0 — DO NOT CALL THE B2 RESULT “RESOLVABLE TO +/-0.21 LIFE”

The stored post-onset B2 profile has delta(-log L) approximately zero at
u = 0.775, 0.80, 0.85, 0.90, 0.95, 0.965, and 0.9725. The total nll variation
across that plateau is about 6e-10. It rises at u = 0.98, where fitted nuisance
parameters are at bounds. The lower threshold crossing is near 0.75; the upper
threshold crossing is therefore a boundary-sensitive departure from an otherwise
flat region, not evidence that the state is estimated with 0.21-life precision.

The report's own honest-limits paragraph says the bound is one noise realization,
one operating point, one canonical unit, and uses a profiler domain that is not
independently justified. Those limits conflict with the headline resolution claim.
Use one of these labels instead:

  “broadly identified over the tested domain, with a flat interval approximately
   [0.75, 0.98] and bound-sensitive upper termination”; or

  “not precisely localized; the B2 profile has a broad likelihood plateau and
   requires a replication/coverage study before a resolution claim.”

Do not promote `profile_verdict == identifiable` into “well resolved.” In this
implementation, “identifiable” means that the profile crosses a chosen threshold
on both sides. It does not mean a unique interior minimum, a symmetric interval,
or stable resolution under nuisance-bound changes.

Required follow-up before a resolution claim:

1. Record every fitted nuisance parameter and bound-hit flag at the interval edges.
2. Re-run with expanded scientifically justified nuisance bounds. If the upper
   crossing moves with the bound, report it as bound-limited.
3. Run multiple independent sensor-noise realizations and summarize coverage,
   interval width, minimum bias, and the fraction of unresolved profiles.
4. Run the same profile on the dispersed units already used in the B2 map, then
   on fresh units for confirmation. A canonical-unit profile cannot support a
   cross-unit observability statement.
5. Add a profile plot with the nuisance-bound locations and the threshold marked.
   The JSON alone makes the plateau easy to miss.

P0 — “DOWNWARD BIAS” IS NOT ESTABLISHED BY ONE REALIZATION

The minimum 0.775 versus truth 0.90 is an observed estimation error in one noisy
profile. Call it “an observed downward error of 0.125 in this realization,” not
“bias.” Bias is an expectation over a declared noise/unit sampling distribution.
To use the word bias, preregister repeated seeds, define the estimator (including
tie-breaking across a flat minimum), and report mean error with uncertainty.

P1 — THE CHI-SQUARE(1) PROFILE CUT NEEDS A COVERAGE CHECK

The 1.92 threshold is an asymptotic likelihood-ratio approximation. The problem
here has a nonlinear feature map, bounded nuisance parameters, infeasible regions,
correlated estimated covariance, and very small effective information in the
plateau. The correction record correctly leaves this open. Keep the verdict
descriptive until a parametric coverage simulation checks whether nominal 95%
intervals cover known u values under the exact B2 generator.

The coverage simulation should:

- hold the data-generation truth fixed for each scenario;
- draw many independent sensor seeds, not reuse the profile's one realization;
- fit each profile with the same convergence and infeasibility rules;
- record coverage, interval endpoints, open intervals, boundary hits, and failures;
- include u values pre-onset, near onset, and post-onset;
- report results separately for B1 and B2.

If coverage is poor, do not tune the threshold to make it nominal. Either report
an empirical interval rule or state that the profile threshold is a diagnostic
scale, not a calibrated confidence interval.

P1 — THE “B2 BASELINE BUYS IDENTIFIABILITY” CLAIM NEEDS CAREFUL WORDING

The B2/B1 contrast is useful, but the baseline is simulated at u=0.05 and the
profiler assumes that coordinate is known. That is a strong calibration oracle in
the current design. The result demonstrates the value of that specified reference
observation, not that a fielded system can always acquire a known young state.

Use “the modeled young-baseline observation improves localization under this
design.” Reserve “buys identifiability” for a preregistered comparison that also
states how a deployed actuator obtains and verifies that baseline. In particular,
separate:

- a baseline observed on the same unit at a known cycle;
- a baseline assumed to have normalized life 0.05;
- a baseline acquired after unknown prior use;
- a baseline whose rest, temperature, and loading history differ from the aged
  observation.

P1 — REPLACE NON-STANDARD JSON NUMBERS

The generated `studyB_structural.json` contains `Infinity` values for undefined or
singular collinearity cases. Python's JSON writer emits these by default, but
`Infinity` is not valid JSON under RFC 8259 and fails strict parsers. This matters
for evidence consumers and long-term reproducibility.

Use `null` plus an explicit status field, for example:

  {"value": null, "status": "undefined_inert_parameter"}
  {"value": null, "status": "numerically_singular"}

or sanitize all non-finite values to null and preserve the reason in a parallel
field. Add a strict JSON parse test. Do not use a giant finite sentinel for the
reported index; that would recreate the all_seven problem in another form.

P1 — KEEP THE ALL_SEVEN INDEX OUT OF NUMERIC CLAIMS

The correction record is right that the all_seven subset is at the float64 noise
floor. Tests should assert only its status/category, not a magnitude threshold such
as “greater than 1e6.” The existing analytic test that accepts a huge finite value
is useful for demonstrating a singular direction, but production evidence should
report `numerically_singular` or `undefined`, not compare 6.5e7 with 8.3e7.

P2 — PRESERVE THE HISTORICAL AUDIT TRAIL EXACTLY

The archived JSON preserves the old fields with an additive `SUPERSEDED` annotation,
which is the right intent. Record explicitly that byte identity is not expected after
annotation. Include both source commit and correction commit hashes in the evidence
README so a reviewer can reproduce the exact before/after files without guessing.

P2 — UPDATE STALE PROGRESS LANGUAGE BEFORE MERGE

Search the complete documentation tree for the withdrawn claims. The current branch
still contains historical “structurally aliased” and “+/-0.05 life” text in older
progress entries. Historical text may remain, but it must carry a visible
superseded/withdrawn marker and link to the 2026-09-25 correction. The active claim
spine, results summary, literature ledger, and sprint status must use the new narrow
wording consistently.

MERGE GATE FOR PR #36

For a squash merge today, require the PR description and evidence record to change
the headline wording to broad/bound-sensitive identification, remove “bias” or
qualify it as one-realization error, and either fix strict JSON serialization or
record it as a blocking follow-up. The numerical repair itself is mergeable with
those documentation corrections. Items 1.5 and 1.6 remain prospective work, as do
PV-CRIT-02..08.

Suggested final PR wording:

  “The repaired B2 profile is compatible with a broad post-onset life region in
   this synthetic canonical-unit realization. The profile minimum is 0.775, but
   the likelihood is effectively flat through most of [0.75, 0.98] and the upper
   termination is sensitive to nuisance bounds. We withdraw both ‘structural
   aliasing’ and ‘+/-0.05 resolution’; repeated-seed coverage and bound sensitivity
   are required before making a precision claim. The B1/B2 contrast is descriptive
   evidence that the modeled young baseline adds information.”

No new Study B verdict, C2 run, physical claim, or transfer claim should be added
as part of the squash.
